Documentation of data analysis
================


This document provides a general workflow and overview of the tools and
custm R scripts used for the analysis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Table of Contents

- <a href="#differential-gene-expression-analysis-using-deseq2"
  id="toc-differential-gene-expression-analysis-using-deseq2">Differential
  gene expression analysis using <code>DESeq2</code></a>
- <a href="#identification-of-enriched-3-ends-from-term-seq-data"
  id="toc-identification-of-enriched-3-ends-from-term-seq-data">Identification
  of enriched 3’ ends from Term-seq data</a>
- <a href="#coverage-analysis-of-long-nanopore-reads"
  id="toc-coverage-analysis-of-long-nanopore-reads">Coverage analysis of
  long Nanopore reads</a>
- <a href="#differential-protein-expression-analysis-using-limma"
  id="toc-differential-protein-expression-analysis-using-limma">Differential
  protein expression analysis using <code>limma</code></a>
- <a href="#downstream-data-analysis"
  id="toc-downstream-data-analysis">Downstream data analysis</a>
  - <a href="#arcog-enrichment-analyis"
    id="toc-arcog-enrichment-analyis">arCOG enrichment analyis</a>
  - <a href="#promoter-and-terminator-analysis"
    id="toc-promoter-and-terminator-analysis">Promoter and terminator
    analysis</a>
  - <a href="#operon-coverage-analysis"
    id="toc-operon-coverage-analysis">Operon coverage analysis</a>
  - <a href="#correlation-analysis"
    id="toc-correlation-analysis">Correlation analysis</a>
  - <a href="#detection-and-analysis-of-signature-clusters"
    id="toc-detection-and-analysis-of-signature-clusters">Detection and
    analysis of signature clusters</a>
- <a href="#tools-used" id="toc-tools-used">Tools used</a>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Differential gene expression analysis using `DESeq2`

The following pipeline was used to analyze RNA-seq data:

1.  Raw sequencing reads in fastq format were filtered and trimmed for
    quality using fastp v. 0.23.2 to remove low-quality bases and
    adapter sequences (–cut_front –cut_tail -q 30).

2.  Ribosomal RNA reads were removed using sortmeRNA v. 4.3.6 based on
    sequences in the SILVA database.  

3.  The rRNA-depleted reads were aligned to the Pyrococcus furiosus DSM
    3638 reference genome (NCBI: CP023154.1) using Bowtie2 v. 2.5.0 with
    default parameters.

4.  The resulting sequence alignment files (SAM) were converted to
    binary mapping format (BAM) using samtools.

5.  Differentially expressed genes were identified using DESeq2 package
    following the recommendations in the Bioconductor vignette.

6.  FeatureCounts from RSubread package v. 2.10.5 was used to calculate
    the count matrix based on a custom GTF file generated by filtering
    the P. furiosus DSM 3638 GFF annotation file downloaded from NCBI
    for protein-coding genes (column biotype).

7.  Principal component analysis (PCA) was performed on variance
    stabilizing transformed (VST) data, and outlier replicates were
    removed from the dataset after visual inspection.

8.  Differential expression analysis was conducted by comparing each of
    the cold or heat shock conditions with the control condition in a
    pairwise manner.

### Identification of enriched 3’ ends from Term-seq data

### Coverage analysis of long Nanopore reads

### Differential protein expression analysis using `limma`

### Downstream data analysis

#### arCOG enrichment analyis

#### Promoter and terminator analysis

#### Operon coverage analysis

#### Correlation analysis

#### Detection and analysis of signature clusters

### Tools used

- fastp v. 0.23.2: <https://github.com/OpenGene/fastp>
- sortmeRNA v. 4.3.6: <https://github.com/biocore/sortmerna>
- Bowtie2 v. 2.5.0: <https://github.com/BenLangmead/bowtie2>
- samtools: <https://github.com/samtools/samtools>
- DESeq2 package:
  <https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/DESeq2.html>
- RSubread package v. 2.10.5:
  <https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/Rsubread.html>
